{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Extra\
\
\
\
In words, equations 10-12 state the following. Goals have sampling likelihoods (equation 12) that are based on the environment and utility perceptions for each possible goal. If sampled, goals produce subjective experiences (equation 10) that combine with and update prior utility (equation 11). This process occurs across all possible goals in the environment. \
\
Note that GST is not saying that variables like valence and expectancy are unimportant, those aspects can still be substituted for utility. Rather, these ideas should be seen as complimentary, where notions of deadline time and valence combine with prior experiences and the environment to inform decisions in the moment; GST then emphasizes global sampling behavior across time.\
\
\
\
Proposition 3 leads to an important question: how long are the intervals between $t$ and $t - 1$? Should the interval be measured in minutes, hours, or days? I do not know, and this is an immediate application for empirical research.\
\
\
Fourth, GST makes specific predictions regarding goal utility stability. Autoregression is included in the formal model, and doing so restricts the movement of utility across time. That is, utility is bounded by where it was in the past and cannot move up or down beyond values allowed by the autoregressive parameter. The probability of sampling a goal can change dramatically due to the environment, but its overall utility does not have the same volatile property. Continuing with the reading example, this would mean that our professor's likelihood of sampling the goal 'read 50 pages' may vary dramatically at each moment due to the environment, but her utility is bounded (to the extent of $b_0$) by where it was the last time she sampled the goal. \
\
\
\
Second, our discussion of dynamics forced us to consider other variables that influence utility across time, and we emerged with experiences. As will be discussed below, incorporating experiences helps GST capture goal sampling irrespective of goal completion. There are many examples where individuals can still sample goals even after completing them, but past utility theories overlook these situations by focusing only on behavior leading up to goal completion. \
\
\
\
# Predictions and Examples\
\
One of the benefits of formal theories is that they make strong, testable predictions. The implications of a formal theory, however, can be difficult to follow without concrete examples highlighting what the various components represent. In this section, I discuss additional predictions that follow GST's formal model of goal "A" and use several examples as a backdrop to understand the equations.\
\
\
\
(with respect to stability of negative estimates)\
This prediction, at first, seems contradictory to the notion of greater false negatives discussed above. Keep in mind, however, that negative estimates are stable in situations where individuals freely sample their goals. As soon as the environment forces sampling this notion of stability goes away. \
\
\
\
\
Propositions five, six, and seven relate to utiliy estimate bias.  \
\
\
\
\
*IMPROPER EXPERIENCE DISTRIBUTION*\
Now imagine a second, related example. Our employee is still sampling the goal 'raise $1200,' and her "true" utility is again 0.7. In this case, however, assume experiences are drawn from a distribution centered about 0.0 with a standard deviation of 1. Our employee is still subject to the possibility of a biased estimate due to the first draw being unrepresentative of the mean, but here there is an additional constraint: the experience distribution is not centered around the actual utility of the goal (0.7) and therefore accurate estimates of utility are extremely unlikely. There are a host of (potentially unknowable) factors that determine whether goals produce positive or negative experiences and GST raises the idea that these may create sampling tendencies that, in turn, produce biased estimates of utility. I unpack my reasoning for differentiating the experience distribution from utility in the assumptions section. \
\
\
\
**Proposition \
\
*New Predictions*\
\
-depends on the distribution of experiences\
-are the distributions stable?\
\
-utility bias\
\
\
\
Utility bias is also subject to the nature of the experience distribution, such that some distributions result in more or less bias. First, consider situations where the mean of the experience distribution aligns with the true utility estimate. In this case, the likelihood of utility bias is lowest when the experience distribution is centered substantially above or below zero. That is, utility estimates are likely accurate when goal sampling produces very positive or very negative experiences, where goals that return positive experiences will drive further sampling and lead to a greater understanding of the distribution (i.e., lower bias), while goals that return negative experiences will not be sampled but are not biased because utility itself is poor. Now consider situations where the mean of the experience distribution does not align with the true utility estimate. In this case, estimates of utility will be systematically biased upward when the distribution falls above the true estimate and downward when the distribution falls below the true estimate.\
}